@atproto/api v0.14.0 release notes (#307)
bluesky-social/bsky-docs: blog/2025-02-14-typescript-sdk-release.md

---
slug: api-v0-14-0-release-notes
title: '@atproto/api v0.14.0 release notes'
tags: ['updates', 'guide']
---

Today we are excited to announce the availability of version 0.14 of our TypeScript SDK on [npm](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@atproto/api).

This release is a big step forward, significantly improving the type safety of our `@atproto/api` package. Let’s take a look at the highlights:

- Lexicon derived interfaces now have an explicitly defined `$type` property, allowing to properly discriminate unions.
- Lexicon derived `is*` utility methods no longer unsafely type cast their input.
- Lexicon derived `validate*` utility methods now return a more precise type.

> - New Lexicon derived `isValid*` utility methods are now available.

Reviewer: These are are gonezo, right

Author: Right

## Context

Atproto is an "open protocol". This means a lot of things. One of these things is that the data structures handled through the protocol are extensible. Lexicons (which is the syntax used to define the schema of the data structures) can be used to describe placeholders where arbitrary data types (defined through third party Lexicons) can be used.

> An example of such placeholder exists in the lexicon definition of a Bluesky post

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An example of such placeholder exists in the Lexicon definition of a Bluesky post
```
I just noticed other tiny thing, I think `Lexicon` is always capitalized?

// Aliased for clarity
type BlueskyPost = AppBskyFeedPost.Main

// Say we got some random post somehow (typically
// via an api call)
declare const post: BlueskyPost

// And we want to know what kind of embed it contains
const { embed } = post

// We can now use the `$type` property to disambiguate
if (embed?.$type === 'app.bsky.embed.images') {
  // The `embed` variable is fully typed as
  // `$Typed<AppBskyEmbedImages.Main>` here !
}
```

### `is*` utility methods

The example above shows how data can be discriminated based on the `$type` property. The SDK provides utility methods to perform this kind of discrimination. These methods are named `is*` and are generated from the lexicons. For example, the `app.bsky.embed.images` Lexicon used to generate the following `isMain` utility method:

```typescript
export interface Main {
  images: Image[]
  [x: string]: unknown
}

export function isMain(value: unknown): values is Main {
  return (
    value != null &&
    typeof value === 'object' &&
    '$type' in value &&
    (value.$type === 'app.bsky.embed.images' ||
      value.$type === 'app.bsky.embed.images#main')
  )
}
```

That implementation of the discriminator is invalid.

> - Fist because a `$type` is not allowed to end with `#main` (as per atproto specification).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- First, because a `$type` is not allowed to end with `#main` (as per atproto specification).
```
Sorry I hadn't closed the tab, came back to it and noticed one more thing, also a comma would be good I think

  // notice how the `images` property is missing here
}

// This predicate function only checks the value of
// the `$type` property, making the condition "true" here
if (AppBskyEmbedImages.isMain(invalidEmbed)) {
  // However, the `images` property is missing here.
  // TypeScript does not complain about this, but the
  // following line will throw a runtime error:
  console.log('First image:', invalidEmbed.images[0])
}
```

The root of the issue here is that the `is*` utility methods perform type casting of objects solely based on the value of their `$type` property. There were basically two ways we could fix this behavior:

1. Alter the implementation to actually validate the object's structure. This would be a non-breaking change that has a negative impact on performance.
2. Alter the function signature to describe what the function actually does. This is a breaking change because TypeScript would start (rightfully) returning lots of errors in places where these functions are used.

Because this release introduces other breaking changes, and because adapting our own codebase to this change showed it made more sense, we decided to adopt the latter option.

:::tip

> In lots of cases where data needs to be discriminated, this change in the signature of the `is*` function will actually not cause any issue when upgrading the version of the SDK.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In many cases where data needs to be discriminated, this change in the signature of the `is*` function won't actually cause any issues when upgrading the version of the SDK.
```
and one slight suggested tweak here which I think flows better

}
```

For other cases, when the data's validity is not known at dev time, we added new `isValid*` utility methods allowing to ensure that a value properly satisfies the interface.

```typescript
import { AppBskyEmbedImages } from '@atproto/api'

// Aliased for clarity
const Images = AppBskyEmbedImages.Main
const isValidImages = AppBskyEmbedImages.isValidMain

// Get an embed with unknown validity somehow
declare const embed: unknown

// The following condition will be true if, and only
// if, the value matches the `Image` interface.
if (isValidImages(embed)) {
  // `embed` is of type `Images` here
}
```

These methods perform data validation, making them somewhat slower than the `is*` utility methods. They can, however, be used in place of the `is*` utilities when migrating to this new version of the SDK.

## `validate*` utility methods

As part of this update, the signature of the `validate*` utility methods was updated to properly describe the type of the `value` in case of success:

```typescript
import { AppBskyEmbedImages } from '@atproto/api'

// Aliased for clarity
const Images = AppBskyEmbedImages.Main
const validateImages = AppBskyEmbedImages.validateMain

> // Get some date somehow

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Get some data somehow
```

```typescript
export interface Main {
  video: BlobRef
  captions?: Caption[]
  alt?: string
  aspectRatio?: AppBskyEmbedDefs.AspectRatio
  [k: string]: unknown
}
```

This signature allowed for undetectable mistakes to be performed:

```typescript
import { AppBskyEmbedVideo } from '@atproto/api'

const embed: AppBskyEmbedVideo.Main = {
  $type: 'app.bsky.embed.video',
  video: { /* omitted */ }
  // Notice the typo in `alt`, not resulting in a TypeScript error
  atl: 'My video'
}
```

We removed that signature, requiring any un-specified fields intentionally added to be now explicitly marked as such:

```typescript
import { AppBskyEmbedVideo } from '@atproto/api'

const embed: AppBskyEmbedVideo.Main = {
  $type: 'app.bsky.embed.video',
  video: { /* omitted */ }

>   // Next line wil result in a TypeScript

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // Next line will result in a TypeScript
```
